Background 
This portfolio of evidence comprises two parts submitted during the semester, and the finalisation 
of your POE, each of which takes you through conceptualising, designing, and building a mobile 
application. 
You are going to create an app of your choice for a change. The app must make use of an API that 
you create yourself, utilising the knowledge learned in PROG7311, PROG7312, 
CLDV6212/APPR6212*, and APDS7312. The app must include the stated features described in the 
introduction section below. 
Finally, the app will need to be prepared so that it can be published on the Google Play Store, as 
well as making use of unit testing and GitHub Actions for running the necessary tests. 
To be able to create the app, you will need to use all the techniques you learned during this course, 
as well as do your research on how to complete some of the tasks required of you. It is also critical 
that you approach the project in a methodical and planned manner. For this reason, the project will 
follow a Research – Plan – Design – Build – Evaluate cycle: 
Research
 Evaluate
 Build
 Plan
 Design
 This POE will run for one full cycle. After one full cycle, you can always restart the process to refine 
your app further. 
The different phases of the cycle will be related to the different tasks as follows: 

 
 
 Part 1: Research, Planning and Design 
Part 2: Build 
Final POE: Build and Evaluate. 
© The Independent Institute of Education (Pty) Ltd 2025 
Page 3 of 24 
25            
2025 
Introduction 
Each of the below parts builds on top of the other. Be sure to complete or update one part before 
moving on to the next. Each part will be individually assessed by your lecturer, and feedback for 
each part will be provided. 
The exact features, design, and layout of your app are up to you, but each app must be able to 
complete at least the following features: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The user must be able to register and log in to the app using single sign-on (SSO). 
Make use of Biometric Authentication: Implement fingerprint or facial recognition for secure 
user authentication. (POE only). 
The user must be able to change their settings in the app. 
Connect to a REST API you create that is connected to a database. 
Offline mode with Sync: Create a feature that allows users to perform actions offline with 
synchronisation capabilities once they reconnect. This does not need to be the whole app, but 
at least some features. Can make use of RoomDB or SQL Lite (POE only). 
Implementation of Real-time Notification: Implement a push notification system for real-time 
updates and alerts (POE only). 
Multi-language support that includes at least two South African Languages (POE only). 
These features are the minimum that’s required. Your app also needs to work logically and be easy 
to use. Speak to your lecturer about how your app can best implement all these features. 
© The Independent Institute of Education (Pty) Ltd 2025 
Page 4 of 24 
25            2025 
© The Independent Institute of Education (Pty) Ltd 2025 
Page 5 of 24 
Part 1 — Research, Planning and Design________________________________        (Marks: 100) 
Learning Unit 1 
At the end of this specific part, students should be able to: 
 Explain how to connect to a RESTful Application Programming Interface (API). 
 Define the features that the app will include. 
 Define the use case of their app. 
 
This part is composed of two sections, weighted equally: 
 Research 
 Planning and design 
 
Research                                                                                                                                          (Marks: 50) 
For this part, you are required to research three existing apps that are similar to the one you want 
to create and are available on the Android operating system. You will need to present your findings 
in the form of a report (2000 to 2500 words) with the following sections: 
 
 Introduction 
 Research on each app, including: 
o Overview of the app 
o Strengths and weaknesses of the app 
o How you think the app was implemented based on your knowledge of Android Studio 
App development 
o Screenshots of the app. 
 A comparison of all three apps. 
 A list of the best features of all the apps that you want to use in your final app. 
 Conclusion. 
 References. 
 
The information must be submitted in the form of a report. Make sure you reference this part 
correctly.  
 
 Make sure that the size of the PDF file does not exceed 10 MB. 
 Please note that if you don’t find an app that matches exactly, then look for one that 
matches at least some of the features. 
25            2025 
© The Independent Institute of Education (Pty) Ltd 2025 
Page 6 of 24 
Planning and Design                                                                                                                     (Marks: 50) 
For this part, you will need to design your app fully. The purpose of this part is to ensure you know 
exactly what you need to build and how you will build it before you start with part 2. You will need 
to present your design as a typed PDF document (2000 to 2500 words) with the following sections: 
 Introduction. 
 A brief overview of the app, including a name for the app, an initial icon design, and a 
description of the innovative features that you are planning to include. 
 A detailed list of the requirements for the app.  
The requirements must include all the minimum requirements from this document, but you must 
elaborate on each of those requirements rather than just copying them. Remember to add the 
features that you want to include, for example, gamification. The requirements must be detailed 
enough for someone else to be able to build your app by just reading this document! You need to 
make these clear since you will be marked on these for part 2 and the POE. 
 User interface design, including a mockup for each screen, a description of the purpose of 
the screen, and a diagram showing how the user navigates between the various screens. 
 Design what your API will do for your application and what data it will send and receive. Also, 
state how you are going to be creating your API and what hosting will be used. 
 UML diagrams that include how the API is connected and other systems to the application. 
 Detailed listing of the data that the app needs to capture from the user and store, including 
data types. 
 Project plan detailing deadlines and milestones for the project in the format of a Gantt chart. 
Break down the tasks into smaller tasks than just “implement the prototype”. Include some 
time for testing and bug fixing. 
 Conclusion. 
 References. 
Maximum Word Count: 2500. 
 
Submit the following for Part 1: 
 Research Report in PDF format. 
 Planning and design document in PDF format. 
 If applicable, a short write-up (maximum 500 words) on the manner in which AI tools were 
used and cited during the completion of this assessment. Examples could include code 
snippets, debugging errors, image generation, etc. 